Add EIP: Execution-Layer Reorg State Retention Window (#11601)
ethereum/EIPs: EIPS/eip-8252.md

---
eip: 8252
title: Execution-Layer Reorg State Retention Window

> description: Require EL clients to retain enough state to re-execute across any reorg within the weak-subjectivity horizon

Reviewer: why the weak subjectivity horizon? it seems to be we should be basing this off the maximum non-finality window which in turn is defined by how long it takes for validators to bleed out during inactivity leak (https://eth2book.info/latest/part2/incentives/inactivity/#inactivity-leak)

Author: With EIP-7928 and snap/2, clients will keep 3533 epochs (=WSP) of BALs around and would need to re-sync if there was a reorg deeper than that period.
Similar to snap/1, if a reorg exceeds the client’s retained/recoverable state horizon, the client must re-sync state instead of processing the reorg incrementally using state diffs. In snap/2 that horizon is the WSP. In geth f.e. snap sync today it is effectively bounded by the locally recoverable snap/pivot state, after which geth falls back to snap sync again.
So, you're right that the max reorg could be ~8,678 (38d) with 75% of validators offline, it's here also a trade off between how many BALs/state diffs we want to keep around before we snap sync again. Note, snap sync starts at HEAD-64 and not the finalized block.
Today, some EL clients only support reorgs of depth 128, which is the main rational behind this change - ensuring it's more than just 128 before triggering re-sync.
I will put this on today's ACD agenda for discussion. It feels like we could also increase the BAL retention period to 38 days and then be able to use the finalized block as the first pivot in snap/2.

Reviewer: > With EIP-7928 and snap/2, clients will keep 3533 epochs (=WSP)

Sounds like the same argument could be made for 7928 then ;) ie semantically, we will never reorg deeper than finality so this seems like a worthy target - consensus clients are expected to handle reorgs exactly that deep but this of course relies on execution clients following suit.

>  Today, some EL clients only support reorgs of depth 128,

I see this as a quality-of-implementation issue more than anything, ie we can state an expectation in the spec and then clients do what they will with it - not supporting deep reorgs means that the user manually must get involved in ethereum recovery - but it's also important to align EL and CL on this point since otherwise we'll be wasting resources on at least one of the sides of the coin - there's scant reason to have CL's support deep reorgs as they do without the underlying EL support present.

Author: Agree but one difference there is that "handling reorgs" on the EL can be done in two ways, rolling back or resyncing.
Snap sync uses HEAD-64 as the first pivot block and doesn't anchor on a finalized checkpoint, thus clients can handle such reorgs. The question is more "how" (resync vs rolling back), and here we argue that rolling back should be possible until WSP, whereas everything beyond that requires resyncing state.
For snap/1 and /2, nodes must resync if they don't have enough state diffs around to rewind state.
BALs won't help there as they're one-directional (only have the post-state and not the pre-state) and can only  be used in the healing phase.

Reviewer: > doesn't anchor on a finalized checkpoint,

maybe this would be something to rectify in snap/2? ie anchor it on finalized explicitly? though I guess this might be slightly more expensive for some client designs since they now have to be ready for longer replays and more "temporary" state in adversarial conditions

Author: yeah I thought about that too but ended up not changing it and keep it similar to snap/1, only touching the healing phase. I can see arguments for and against (being further away from the head, clients needing to load state diffs from disk -> being much slower) it. With head-64 you get snap sync results fast without having EL clients need to rewind state with state diffs from disk just for helping sync.

author: Toni Wahrstätter (@nerolation), Kevaundray Wedderburn (@kevaundray)
discussions-to: https://ethereum-magicians.org/t/eip-8252-execution-layer-reorg-state-retention-window/28463
status: Draft
type: Standards Track

> category: Core

Reviewer 2: This should be `Informational`

Author: agree, updated it.

created: 2026-04-24
---

## Abstract

Define `REORG_RETENTION_WINDOW = 113_056` blocks (3533 epochs × 32 slots, ~15.7 days) and require EL clients to keep recent state reconstructible (via snapshots, reverse state diffs, or any equivalent representation, in memory or on disk) for every canonical block within this window, so any reorg up to the weak-subjectivity horizon can be processed locally.

## Motivation

EL clients have no protocol-defined floor on how far back recent state must remain reconstructible. [EIP-4444](./eip-4444.md) and successors govern long-term block-history expiry; state-pruning policy is left entirely to clients.

To validate a post-reorg branch handed in via the engine API, an EL must execute its first block against the state of the common ancestor with the local chain. The CL's weak-subjectivity (WS) period bounds how deep a finality reversal a fresh-sync node can resolve without a new trusted checkpoint. If state has been pruned past that ancestor, the node cannot verify the new branch and must fall back to sync. A single retention floor aligned to the WS horizon closes this gap.

## Specification

> The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "SHOULD", and "MAY" in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 and RFC 8174.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "SHOULD", and "MAY" in this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC 2119](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc2119) and [RFC 8174](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8174).
```

---
eip: 8252
title: Execution-Layer Reorg State Retention Window
description: Require EL clients to retain enough state to re-execute across any reorg within the inactivity-leak-bounded non-finality window
author: Toni Wahrstätter (@nerolation), Kevaundray Wedderburn (@kevaundray), Jacek Sieka (@arnetheduck)
discussions-to: https://ethereum-magicians.org/t/eip-8252-execution-layer-reorg-state-retention-window/28463

> status: Living

Reviewer 3: I cannot merge this as Living directly, this should start as Draft. History has we had a few non-Draft-status EIPs merged but this is not a candidate for it (can expand on this if wanted)

Author: Why would you say this is in that first-draft-then-living category although we agreed we want it on ACD?

> type: Informational

Reviewer 3: I believe this type is incorrect. I know I gave a thumbs up on this comment: https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/pull/11601#discussion_r3202133287, but this was impulsive and upon further thought this status is not correct. 

As of https://github.com/ethereum/EIPs/blob/3f561dfb7e27299479ff8aac3359819547965b72/EIPS/eip-1.md we have:

`An Informational EIP describes an Ethereum design issue, or provides general guidelines or information to the Ethereum community, but does not propose a new feature. Informational EIPs do not necessarily represent Ethereum community consensus or a recommendation, so users and implementers are free to ignore Informational EIPs or follow their advice.`

I believe this EIP is a hard requirement ("MUST" by RFC 2119) and this can thus not be ignored, and therefore this cannot be Informational.

Author: The point is that this EIP doesn't change consensus, thus clients are more or less free to do it or not.
Of course, we want all clients, or at least those with major market share among validators to be able to reorg back to a certain block, however, if a client perceives the risk as low, it wouldn't be enforced by the protocol and nothing would happen (except that the client should be seen as riskier to use than others).
Thus, I see it more as a general guideline.

## Motivation

EL clients have no protocol-defined floor on how far back recent state must remain reconstructible. History-expiry rules govern long-term block-history retention; state-pruning policy is left entirely to clients.

To validate a post-reorg branch handed in via the engine API, an EL must execute its first block against the state of the common ancestor with the local chain. That ancestor cannot lie deeper than the chain's last finalized block, and the distance to last finalization is bounded by the CL's inactivity leak: once finality stalls, the leak quadratically penalizes non-participating validators until their share of active stake falls below `1/3` and finality resumes. A single retention floor aligned to that bound closes this gap.

## Specification

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "SHOULD", and "MAY" in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 and RFC 8174.

`REORG_RETENTION_WINDOW = 262144` blocks.

> For every canonical block whose number is within `REORG_RETENTION_WINDOW` of the head, EL clients MUST be able to reconstruct its post-state without sync. The representation (full snapshots, reverse state diffs, or any equivalent) and its location (memory or disk) are unspecified. State older than the window MAY be discarded.

Reviewer 3: Nit: I think for completeness the "without sync" should be made more clear.
I think the requirement that a block which is in the canonical chain, which is "within" (does this include or exclude the boundary block i.e. the most "old" block in this range?) the `REORG_RETENTION_WINDOW` of the head, can reconstruct the entire state trie **without using any networking** (the sync) would capture the definition here (?).

Author: How would you propose to change that sentence?

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For every canonical block `B` with `head.number - B.number <= REORG_RETENTION_WINDOW`, EL clients MUST be able to reconstruct `B`'s post-state using only locally-stored data, without requesting any data over the network. The representation (full snapshots, reverse state diffs, or any equivalent) and its location (memory or disk) are unspecified. State older than the window MAY be discarded.
```

(nit: this assumes head.number >= B.number, since we are talking about reorgs I think this is implicit, and we are talking about the canonical chain also)

Note that this fixes the possible off-by-one also. If the `REORG_RETENTION_WINDOW` is 1, we actually have access to 2 post-states: namely, the head block and the head block minus 1.
